# Strategic Plan: 2020

On July 1, 2020, members of the Xdev Team gathered virtually to
conduct a virtual Start/Stop/Continue strategic planning exercise.
During this exercise, the Team discussed the **activities** in
which we are, or should be, engaged.  Namely, we created a list
of activities in the following categories:

- **Start:** What activities are we *not* currently engaged in
  that we absolutely *should* be engaged?
- **Stop:** What activities are we currently engaged in that we
  should *stop* doing immediately.
- **Continue:** What activities are we currently engaged in that
  we should endeavor to continue.

After 30 minutes of brainstorming ideas in each category above,
each participating member of the Xdev Team was given 5 points to
distribute across activites listed in the *Start* and *Stop*
categories, essentially given everyone on the Team the ability
to vote for what *changes* should be taken in the future of our
work.  The results of this exercise are detailed below.

## Strategic Activities

In our own terminology, the Xdev Team's purpose/mission can be
categorized into two different *Campaigns*: *Workflows* and
*Outreach, Education & Community Building*.  As a team, the work
we do specifically engages in short-term *Projects* targeting
desired features or outcomes related to these Campaigns.  In
the remainder of this document, we use the term *Activity* to
refer to a concept that can be broken down into 1 or more
Projects targeting a single Campaign.

### Continuing Activities

These are Activities in which the Xdev Team is currently engaged
and are expected to continue.

1. Binder on HPC Investigation
   - Describe the general desired outcome
     - e.g., Enable the ability to let any (authorized) user launch
       on Cheyenne/Casper a Jupyter Notebook with the fixed
       environment defined by the author
   - Enumerate the ways that this general desired outcome can be achieved
   - Sketch rough project plans for each enumerated way
   - Prioritize enumerated project plans based on practical factors:
     - How easy is it to implement?
     - How easy is it to test?
     - How long will it take?
     - What risk factors are involved?
   - Develop an implementation plan, following enumerated paths until
     a workable solution is found
2. Cataloging GLADE
   - What datasets are available on GLADE?
   - Who owns or manages those datasets?
   - How can we *easily* generate intake catalogs for those datasets?
   - Train data managers to create catalogs for available datasets
   - Create tools to help data managers create catalogs easily
   - How can we aggregate dataset catalogs into a single, searchable catalog?
3. Notebook Examples
   - Identify good example notebooks that:
     - exist already (and can be spruced up for sharing), and
     - could be written (e.g., examples that could be useful to others)
   - Add notebooks to the Pangeo Gallery (gallery.pangeo.io)
   - Identify examples that make good blog posts, too!
4. Python Tutorials
   - Take tutorials virtual until COVID is not a risk
   - Grow online, self-paced content

### New Activities

These are Activities in which the Xdev Team plan to engage in the
next year (July 2020 - June 2021).  These are Activities that were
listed in the *Start* section of the exercise.

Each individual Activity shows the number of *points* that members
of the Xdev Team gave to each Activity in the *Start* section.  I
have listed the number of points given to each Activity below.
Some Activities *mirrored* Activities in the *Stop* section (e.g.,
"Start better communication practices" and "Stop bad communication
practices").  For those Activities, I list both the points given
to their *Start* and *Stop* Activities separately, with the notation
"I+J points" (i.e., I points from the *Start* section and J points
from the *Stop* section).

I have prioritized each Activity in order of the most points, and I
have not shown any Activity ideas that were given zero points.  I
have also attempted to take any comments made about each Activity
during the discussion section of the exercise and use those ideas to
scope out general project ideas for each Activity.

1. Documentation Improvements [6 points]
   - Publish documentation on how to properly use the NCAR JupyterHub
   - Publish documentation on how to manage environments (conda, etc.)
     on Cheyenne/Casper (links to Conda Metapackage Project)
   - New blog post!
   - Determine how to publish documentation on how to use the NCAR Zulip service
     - How should we do this considering the Zulip service is “private/internal”?
     - What is an “internal” publication forum?
     - Can we publish this on Zulip itself?
   - Publish documentation on NCAR Zulip (to the determined forum)
   - Update tutorial (live and self-paced) information based on current best practices
   - Establish a system for regularly revisiting documentation to keep it up-to-date
2. CF-Xarray & GeoCAT Development / Decommission ESMLab [5+1 points]
   - New blog post? (about the plan/initiative) Or some other discussion/announcement
     forum?
   - Triage existing features of ESMLab
     - Does this functionality already exist somewhere else?
       CF-Xarray or GeoCAT or elsewhere
     - Where should they move?  CF-Xarray or GeoCAT or elsewhere
     - Create matching issue in appropriate location
   - Triage existing issues in ESMLab
     - To where should the feature these issues pertain move?
       CF-Xarray or GeoCAT or elsewhere
     - Move (or re-write with attribution) issues in appropriate new location
   - Determine a priority order for new issues
   - Schedule a series of mini hackathons to address each issue in priority order
   - Once ESMLab-related issues are complete, decommission ESMLab
   - New blog post?
   - Determine if it is valuable to continue these hackathons specifically to
     continue contributions to either CF-Xarray, GeoCAT, or another repository
3. Conda Metapackage [5 points]
   - Identify necessary base packages for typical Pangeo environment
     (e.g., from the tutorial)
     - Can we have Conda packages install labextensions, if necessary?
   - Create a suite of unit tests that can be used to validate if the
     environment is working (i.e., common problems, routine operations, etc.)
   - Create a repository that implements CI to:
     - Install the environment with the most recent versions of environment packages
     - Detect if any versions of packages have changed
     - If new versions are detected, run the test suite
     - If (and only if) tests pass, mint a new version of the environment
     - If a new version of the environment is created, publish a new version
       of the metapackage
     - Implement this workflow periodically (e.g., every week, or every day)
   - Use the repository + CI to deliver regular updates to a Conda metapackage
   - New blog post!
4. Cloud Deployment Scoping [5 points]
   - Scope out a use case for learning how to deploy and maintain a cloud
     Pangeo hub of our own
   - Some ideas to explore:
     - Determine how to obtain the cheapest deployment possible for various purposes:
       education/training, science/research, development/testing
     - A specialized hub for online tutorials/self-paced learning
     - A small-team research deployment (e.g., for Matt Long’s group, or for us
       to use to test notebooks and notebook scaling solutions)
     - Target a new service to implement that would need a testing/development hub
       (e.g., a notebook sharing/publication repository)
   - Determine best use cases (1-2) and deploy hubs for those use cases
   - Blog post
5. Xdev Communication Strategy [4+1 points]
   - Identify all communication channels used by Xdev
     - GitHub Issues/PRs (and comments within)
     - Xdev Blog (ncar.github.io/xdev)
     - Email (xdev@ucar.edu)
     - Twitter (@NCARXdev)
     - Zulip (xdev stream)
     - Other?
   - Identify their purpose
     - Who do they connect?
     - For internal or external communication?  (Internal to Team?  Internal to NCAR?)
     - What direction is the communication intended?  Incoming (into Xdev) or
       Outgoing (out from Xdev)?
     - Write up a `COMMGUIDE.md` document in the xdev repo as a guide
6. Outreach & Community Building [4 points]
   - Identify venues for communication to others at NCAR
     - Bulletins
     - CISL Communique
     - Staff notes
     - Twitter/blog posts
     - CISL WIP talks
     - Seminars
     - Other?
   - Tell people who we are and what we do
     - Identify the aspects of what we do that we can collaborate on (open source)
   - Find people at other labs who can join the effort (join Xdev, if possible)
7. Regridding Tools (for 2D Horizontal Grids) [3 points]
   - Inventory existing common grids
     - Cartesian lat/lon
     - POP grid
     - SE grid
     - MPAS grid
     - Other?
   - Generalize regridding approach
     - Involves interpolation from a grid to a point not on the grid
   - Implement a tool to do this generically
   - Investigate whether this tool can abstract away grids entirely
8. Notebook Sharing Service [2]
   - How can we create a service that allows users to “share” a notebook with other users?
   - Define “sharing”:
     - Make it possible for one user to use another user’s notebook in their own
       “personal workspace” (e.g., in the home directory on GLADE)
     - This implies that one user gets a “copy” of the ipynb file in their
       “personal workspace”
     - It also implies that the necessary conda environment be created (or made
       available) to the user who wants to run the copy of the notebook
     - It also implies that the conda environment created for the notebook be “editable”
       so the user can modify their copy of the notebook and add new packages as necessary
     - **NOTE:  This is basically the Binder on HPC solution!**
       That is, the Binder on HPC solution should be leveraged to make this
       “sharing service” work!
   - Minimal Requirements:
     - A git-like repository that stores notebooks
     - Users can “commit” their notebook to the repository
     - Other users can “clone” a notebook in the repository
     - Commit procedure “records” the necessary conda environment needed for sharing
     - Clone procedure reproduces the necessary conda environment
   - How can we gather metadata to make notebooks searchable/discoverable?
   - NOTE: Look at how NERSC is using their own hosted `nbviewer` server to share
     notebooks hosted on GitHub repositories along with the notebook environments

### Terminating Activities

The Activities listed in the *Stop* category of this exercise, for the most
part, corresponded to Activities listed in the *Start* category, above.  That is,
each Activity identified as something we should *Stop* had a "mirror" Activity
that we identified as something we should *Start*.  For example, "Start better
communication practices" mirrored "Stop bad communication practices".  Hence,
there is no separate list of Activities to terminate.
