# Strategic Plan: 2021

On January 13 and 27, 2021, members of the Xdev Team gathered
virtually to conduct a virtual Start/Stop/Continue strategic
planning exercise.  We endeavor to be open an inclusive in all
that we do, and this exercise is an inclusive method for
determining our strategic prioreties around what we should be
doing and how we should be doing it. During this exercise, the
Team discussed the **Processes** and **Activities** in which we
are, or should be, engaged.  By *Processes*, we were referring
to the way that we operate as a Team.  By *Activities*, we were
referring to the projects that we are (or might) be working on.
Namely, for both Activites and Processes, we created a list of
items distributed across the following subcategories:

- **Start:** What Activities or Processes are we *not* currently
  engaged in that we absolutely *should* be engaged?
- **Stop:** What Activities or Processes are we currently engaged
  in that we should *stop* doing immediately.
- **Continue:** What Activities or Processes are we currently engaged
  in that we should endeavor to continue.

After brainstorming ideas in each category and subcategory above,
each participating member of the Xdev Team was given 15 points to
distribute across *Activities* listed in the *Start*, *Stop*, and
*Continue* subcategories, and each member was given 10 points to
distribute across *Processes* listed in the *Start*, *Stop*, and
*Continue* subcategories.  The results of this exercise are detailed
below.

## Processes: *How we work*

The dominant thread through all of the comments and suggestions that
came out of the *Processes* part of the Start/Stop/Continue exercise
was an overwhelming desire to increase team-wide engagement in all
of our activities and reduce siloing (i.e., eliminate single points
of failure).  Almost all of the brainstorming items from this part of
the exercise can be addressed by creating a more engaged, inclusive,
and welcoming team environment.  This is a very hard problem to solve,
but it is one that we should all take ownership for and strive to
overcome.

I do not suggest that this is the solution, but guided by suggestions
that were made in the exercise, I am going to propose a solution to
this problem that involves imposing a 4-week "Project Cycle" that looks
like this:

- Monday, Week 1: *Project Pitch Meeting* (short)
  - Team Members pitch "project" ideas for the cycle:
    - Need to clearly indicate the desired outcome of the project,
      number of staff ideally needed to succeed in 2 weeks, and
      stakeholders
  - Team Members vote on "project" ideas for the current cycle
    - Select highest voted projects based on staffing available and
      staffing needed (e.g., if 3 projects are pitched with staffing
      needs of 2, 3, and 2, and the team consists of 5 people, then
      only the 2 projects with the highest votes are chosen)
    - Team Members choose which project they want to work on for
      this cycle (equitable selection method, not first-come-first-serve)
    - Team Member(s) who pitched the project are selected as
      "Project Leads"
    - Projects that are not selected for this cycle retain their
      votes for the next cycle (i.e., they don't start with zero
      votes at the next Pitch Meeting)
- Remainder, Week 1: *Project Planning*
  - Project Leads prepare a "deep dive" session on the necessary
    code, and give pointers to Project Team Members about what code
    they should familiarize themselves with before the "deep dive"
    session (this is hard!!!)
  - Project Leads prepare "Project Specification" documents
- Monday, Week 2: *Project Presentations Meeting*
  - Team Leads go over project specification document, goals and
    point Project Team to code they should get familiar with
*Team Pre-Learning*
  - Project Team explores and tries to come up to speed with
    material given to them in the Presentation Meeting
- Wednesday, Week 2: *Project Training Sessions* (long)
  - Project Leads give "deep dive" training sessions to the rest of the
    Project Team
  - Project Leads indicate goals and discuss project plans (i.e.,
    contents of the Project Specificaion document)
  - Project Team Members volunteer for tasks
- *Project Work Cycle*
  - Project Leads and Team collaborate on project work, set up necessary
    hack sessions with each other, pair programming, etc.
  - Work proceeds until the work cycle is complete (early completed projects
    can add additional tasks and ammend the Project Spec, projects that
    don't complete just indicate their progress and plans for future)
- Wednesday, Week 4: *Project Summary Meeting*
  - Project Team presents results, conclusions, lessons learned, remaining
    problems to solve and next steps
  - Project Completion Meeting immediately followed by *Project Pitch Meeting*

## Activities: *What we do*

---

## Start/Stop/Continue Exercise Results

Below are the prioritized results from the Start/Stop/Continue
exercise, in detail.  These are the exact comments there were
gathered during the Start/Stop/Continue exercise.

### Team Processes: *How we work*

Team Processes describe *how we work* as a Team, including how we
organize, how we collaborate, how we communicate, etc.  Next to
each item, I list the prioritization number given by accumulating
the points given to that item from all Team Members.

#### Start

These are the Processes that we choose to start doing:

- Pair or shadow programming so we can start learning each other’s codes better [6]
  - How can we improve spin-up time on other people’s projects?
- Conduct semiannual or quarterly team reviews so as to assess team’s progress towards the set goals and/or projects. [5]
  - Need higher frequency of check-ins
  - Can shift team focus more frequently
- Hold regular office hours to address questions in Zulip (a time when users know they can get basically real-time responses, perhaps with some 1-on-1 zoom chat if more detail is needed?) [5]
- Hold regular hack sessions (maybe once every two or three weeks?) to advance Xdev projects / tackle “easy” tickets [4]
  - Easy Column tasks can be done in hack sessions
  - Could be addressed with the pair programming idea above!
- Attempt to keep an eye on identifying stakeholders for different tasks, and make work and priorities more stakeholder-driven.  Include stakeholders in scoping/prioritizing work when possible. [4]
  - Identify stakeholders for each of our projects?
  - Name stakeholders in Project Specs
- Sharing resources to know if we are doing a project that is being done by others [3]
  - e.g., cools things we here about at a conference
  - Consolidate some of our communication channels / docs
- Have repo specific meetings for contributors [2]
  - ...in collaboration with previous bullet

#### Stop

These are the Processes that we choose to stop doing:

- Siloing [5]
  - Haiying is the only person who knows about the lossy compression work
  - Anderson is really the only person who knows intake-esm
  - THIS IS A BIG ONE
- Letting meetings be solely a check in (vs a conversation) [4]
  - Make meetings about collaboration rather than accountability
  - Want to hear about the struggles, rather than just the outcomes
  - Meetings can be more effective if we all had an agreed-upon desired outcome
- Comments to PR is ignored [4]
  - Need to be welcoming to each other!
- IT support [2]
  - Lots of people asking for support around the tutorials
  - ...Can we address this with Zulip?

#### Continue

These are the Processes that we choose to continue doing:

- Educational Resources (tutorials, notebook gallery, etc.) [6]
- Up stream (xarray, intake, etc.) and peripheral (cf-xarray) contributions [5]
- Reviewing each other’s PRs before merge [4]
- Staying up to date with other Xdevers and their projects [2]
- Adding more documentation (examples, API docs, where to start looking to join a project) [1]

### Team Activities: *What we are doing*

In our own terminology, the Xdev Team's purpose/mission can be
categorized into two different *Campaigns*: *Workflows* and
*Outreach, Education & Community Building*.  We engage in
numerous and diverse projects in both of these spaces.  In the
remainder of this document, an *Activity* could be a single
project or something broad enough to break down in to numerous
smaller projects.

#### Start

These are Activities in which the Xdev Team plan to engage in the
next year.  These are Activities that were listed in the *Start*
section of the exercise.

- zulip-FAQ + zulip-chat bot for retrieving answers from the pre-compiled FAQ [8]
- Reach out to other NCAR python users (and gather potential new Xdev members); NCAR python user survey? Presentations to other labs about Pangeo (goal is to get more collaborators) [7]
  - University collaborations to bring in students beyond SIParCS [3]
- A Dokku (http://dokku.viewdocs.io/dokku/) service: Allow scientists to deploy live applications/dashboards on NCAR’s hardware [6]
- RDA/DASH Cataloging: [5]
  - RDA-labextension: Jupyterlab extension to interface with RDA via its rest API (https://rda.ucar.ucar.edu/apps)
  - Cataloging RDA (https://rda.ucar.edu/) and DASH (https://www2.cisl.ucar.edu/dash) datasets for intake/intake-esm usage
- Dictionary of abbreviations (I'm lost at some points until I take a sec to figure out an acronym, and then I'm behind for a bit on meetings) [4]
- Benchmarking [4]
  - Pangeo stack on new MPI library or HPX
  - Benchmarking on GPUs (Cupy?)
- Jupyterlab-pbs: Jupyterlab extension to interface with PBS [3]
- Jupyterlab-zarr:  Jupyterlab data explorer (viewer) for zarr [3]
- Intake-index: A service that lists available intake catalogs [3]
  - Give a list of “registered intake catalogs”
- Uniform style sheet/linting for languages? (GeoCAT uses yapf-google for python, no linting for legacy Fortran Code) [2]
  - Similar to the above, but a general best-practices page for python development?
  - Black vs yapf-google
- Create a notebook gallery or alternative method for our team to share advanced Python codes and Pangeo codes [2]
- Tools to help transfer data between glade and campaign (e.g. wrappers for globus-cli to help with common transfer patterns)  (What about glade -> stratus too?) [2]
  - https://github.com/NCAR/isd-s3
- Help maintaining conda environments to be shared among collaborators (esp on cheyenne) [2]
  - pangeo metapackage? with CI validation?
- Effort to automate CMIP Analysis Platform updates? [2]
  - Ideally, link with a running service
- Data format standards? (FITS file equivalent for earth sciences?) (netCDF?) [1]
  - CF-conventions?  CMIP6 requirements is the closest…but still not perfect
- Google Colab https://colab.research.google.com/ for instant-on examples (useful for seminars and tutorials) (example of demo) [1]

#### Stop

There were no items identified as Activities that we need to *Stop* doing immediately
that we haven't already done.

#### Continue

These are Activities in which the Xdev Team is currently engaged
and are expected to continue.

- Collaborating with GeoCAT team [9]
  - Really liked the GeoCAT-vis hackathon!
- Tutorials / Seminar series [8]
- SIParCS collaborations with Pangeo community members [6]
- Contributing to upstream core packages (xarray, dask, dask-jobqueue, etc…) [4]
- jupyter-forward [3]
- Provide individual Consulting to NCAR scientists re: jupyter notebook development [3]
- Providing more data analysis notebook examples for NCAR scientists who are learning the Pangeo stack [3]
- Python-based CESM diagnostics (analysis (pop-tools) and visualizations) [2+1]
- Cataloging CESM output [2]
- Development of Jupyter ecosystem utilities/services/etc that improve or enhance the NCAR JupyterHub deployment [2]
  - Dask-Gateway
  - JupyterLab extensions
- Zarrification of NCAR data holdings and transfer to Amazon AWS [2]
- Benchmarking on AWS clouds, Google clouds, with docker and singularity [2]
- Xpersist development [2]
- Xpublish development [2]
